---
id: 4
title: "How to revitalise an underperforming pedestrian mall"
author: "Nicki Booth"
draft: false
slug: "how-to-revitalise-an-underperforming-pedestrian-mall"
date: "2014-02-17T00:13:00+00:00"
description: "Shepparton’s pedestrian mall has been underperforming for years.  User survey data revealed how best to tackle this problem. "
banner: "/img/blog/Shep_article_1.jpg"
---

<div>There are many interacting factors that influence the choice an individual makes when deciding where to shop and recreate. Understanding this requires a suitably sophisticated approach based on good evidence. Extensive consultation, including consumer surveys, provided us with data we could use to quantify the relative importance of activation, amenity and retail choice when it comes to where they would shop in the Greater Shepparton area. From this we identified the most cost-effective way to increase visitor numbers to Shepparton’s Maude Street Mall. The analysis tested the effect of everything from extended opening hours, running more events, a broader retail mix, landscaping, parking and opening the mall to vehicle traffic.<br><br></div><div>Analysing the data involved the use of a method called structural equation modelling. This compared the separate and combined effect of different sets of improvements that regional residents had said were essential if they were to consider coming back to the Mall. By rolling all of these improvements out over a 10 year period, it was estimated that an additional 1.2 million visitors could be attracted to the Mall. Perhaps the most important finding was that individual improvements would have a minimal impact. As the table below shows, only combinations or bundles would have a statistically measurable effect on visitor numbers.&nbsp;</div><div><br><div>There had been a very vocal group in the community arguing for re-opening the Mall to vehicle traffic. However, contrary to expectations, residents said the lack of car access had little to do with them going elsewhere. Parking right outside the shop just wasn’t that important. Furthermore, given the cost (at least $4 million to re-open the Mall to traffic, plus an additional $5 million to replace the civic space that would be lost), modest improvements to amenity and more active streetscapes were far better value for money.<br><br></div><div>These findings confirmed our 13 case studies of regional malls around Australia. This found that simple things like shade, seating, retail choice and activity were more closely associated with successful Mall’s than road access or parking.&nbsp;<br><br></div><div>Our analysis demonstrated that when it comes to mall revitalisation there is no silver bullet. The best approach is bundled improvements that improve amenity, create more choice for visitors and provide more accessible and affordable parking.&nbsp;</div></div><div><br></div>
