---
id: 3
title: "Liveability, Efficiency and the Knowledge Economy"
author: "Nicki Booth"
draft: false
slug: "liveability-efficiency-and-the-knowledge-economy-92fbc55a-2d2c-4ced-b13d-490df0313618"
date: "2015-02-17T00:04:00+00:00"
description: "Liveability, spatial efficiency and the knowledge economy are important to Melbourne’s economic future."
---

<div>Liveability, spatial efficiency and the knowledge economy are important to Melbourne’s economic future and the way they are related to one another makes them relevant subject matter for strategic metropolitan planning. This is particularly so for transport infrastructure priorities and whether liveability near knowledge job clusters should be a metropolitan-wide concern. Updating some work done for Melbourne’s 2012 Knowledge Cities conference has revealed some ‘low hanging fruit’ in the spatial distribution of the knowledge sector that may help shed light on the options for a more liveable and efficient city.&nbsp;<b><br><br>What is the Knowledge Economy?</b></div><div>There are many different ways to classify the knowledge economy, but the most meaningful considers both the industry sector and a worker’s occupation. That is, you can be in the knowledge sector, but not necessarily a knowledge worker. With this in mind, there are around 181,000 knowledge economy jobs in Greater Melbourne (about 11% of all jobs) and the entire knowledge economy is worth about $150b to the State’s economy (a little under half).&nbsp;<br><br><div><b>What Does the Knowledge Economy Look Like?&nbsp;</b></div><div>For the purposes of this article, there are four clearly related dimensions to the knowledge economy that are especially relevant.&nbsp;<br><br><div>1.	Knowledge economy workers are usually younger, more educated and use public transport</div><div>Liveability and the knowledge economy go hand in hand: knowledge workers seek liveable environs in which to work and live. It should come as no surprise, then, that there are clear demographic differences between knowledge workers and the rest of the workforce. For example, they are:&nbsp;<br><br></div><div>• Usually younger (a high proportion of 25-44 year olds and fewer 45+);</div><div>•	Twice as likely to have a bachelor degree or higher;&nbsp;</div><div>•	Almost twice as likely to be in a high income band;&nbsp;</div><div>•	Almost five times as likely to travel by public transport; and</div><div>•	More likely to vote for left of centre parties .&nbsp;<br><br><div>2.	No matter where they work, knowledge workers prefer to live nearby&nbsp;</div><div>Following on from the first point, the location of knowledge workers and jobs are positively correlated; more so than for the rest of the workforce. That is, regardless of where the knowledge economy job is (i.e. in a cluster or not), employment self-containment is higher for knowledge workers, but particularly so around the larger knowledge job clusters. Consequently, the residential distribution of knowledge workers is also somewhat clustered.&nbsp;<br><br></div><div>3.	Knowledge enterprises seek agglomeration benefits</div><div>All jobs in Greater Melbourne cluster in and around the CBD, as well as in major regional centres such as Dandenong, Laverton and Campbellfield . However, knowledge economy jobs are much more concentrated. There is a wealth of research on the importance of this agglomeration (or clustering) to the knowledge economy. We’ll come back to this point later.&nbsp;<br><br></div><div>4.	The knowledge economies: plural not singular</div><div>Finally, the knowledge economy is not a single entity. It is made up of subsectors with different patterns of distribution of jobs and workers. In this analysis, the subsectors are:&nbsp;</div><div>1.	Finance, Banking and Insurance (Finance).</div><div>2.	Design related industries, such as architecture (Design).&nbsp;</div><div>3.	Cultural Industries, such as performing arts (Cultural).</div><div>4.	Telecommunications, IT and Media (IMT).</div><div>5.	Health workers, such as specialist medical services, but not general practitioners or nurses (Health).</div><div>6.	R&amp;D and Higher Education (R&amp;D).<br><br></div><div>Figure 1 shows the breakdown of jobs and workers in these segments for Greater Melbourne.<br><br>The spatial concentrations (or clusters) of these jobs and where the workers live can be identified through some simple statistical analysis at the SA2 level. Figure 2 shows where the knowledge jobs are clustered in Melbourne and Figure 3, where knowledge workers live.<br><br><div><b>So What Does this all Mean?&nbsp;</b></div><div>Table 1 summarises some of the main elements of the spatial distribution of knowledge jobs and workers (industry subsectors are in descending order of employment self-containment.&nbsp;<br><br><div>Overall, Finance, Design, Cultural and IMT workers are the most likely to live near their work. By contrast, with a few local exceptions, there is very little and even a negative correlation between where R&amp;D and Health workers live and where they work (Table 2).&nbsp;</div></div><div><br></div><div><div>As Figure 1 shows, there are clearly defined knowledge clusters around the CBD and near universities such as Monash in Clayton, Latrobe in Kingsbury, RMIT in nearby Bundoora and Victoria University in Footscray. In the CBD, knowledge workers are much more inclined to live nearby. However, this is less likely elsewhere and very unlikely for Health and R&amp;D employees, who make up the bulk of the non-CBD based knowledge workers. &nbsp;<br><br></div><div>What does this mean? We know that knowledge workers earn more than the general population and therefore have greater choice about where they live. It is logical to assume, then, they will choose to live in high amenity areas. The fact that they do not live near the outer metropolitan knowledge job clusters shows they value this over proximity to work.&nbsp;<br><br></div><div>If, then, there is a desire to make Melbourne more efficient, there are two options that immediately come to mind.&nbsp;<br><br><div>1.	Brains on Trains : plan transport connections to improve the access between the residential and job clusters</div><div>We can make it easier for knowledge workers to commute. Not least because of the better networks in the inner city, knowledge workers are more likely to use public transport and facilitating this travel between all of the job and residential clusters should be part of transport planning considerations, particularly major proposals such as the Melbourne Metro. This, and similar routes, are effectively information networks moving ‘brains on trains’ between key locations.&nbsp;<br><br></div><div>2.	Attracting workers to job clusters</div><div>If knowledge workers are inclined to trade off proximity to work for higher amenity then what about removing that need by providing better amenity around the job clusters? This means investing in residential facilities and services in places such as Monash, Dandenong South, East Werribee and Bundoora. If we encourage higher residential density as part of this, then we will also increase catchment area sizes to justify the investment. It will also provide a better choice of housing for knowledge workers at different life cycle stages. Assuming R&amp;D and Health workers ultimately have similar preferences to other knowledge workers, then the low hanging fruit for improving employment self-containment is to be found here.&nbsp;<br><br></div><div>But should we be thinking about influencing the housing decisions of knowledge workers, or the business location decisions of knowledge enterprises? Consider this: knowledge economy jobs concentrate significantly more than other jobs and more than the knowledge workers themselves. This is thought to be because industries gain significant agglomeration benefits and/or rely on very specific infrastructure assets (such as universities or hospitals). Any policy to encourage higher employment self-containment will need to consider whether it is easier to bring the jobs to the workers, or vice versa. Ultimately, it is probably more efficient to fund relatively easy-to-replicate (if not always cheap) residential amenity than the infrastructure needed to attract new enterprises.&nbsp;</div><div><br>Figure 4 shows selected knowledge sector job and residential clusters, along with the current and proposed rail lines in Melbourne.</div></div></div><div><br><div>These thoughts only scratch the surface of the knowledge economy and its relationship to infrastructure planning in Melbourne. There is substantial scope for further analysis, which will help understand who is making what sort of locational decision and why, and, ultimately, how to influence this. &nbsp;</div></div><br>&nbsp;<br></div></div></div></div>
