---
id: 13
title: "What can we learn from global cities?"
author: "Kevin Johnson"
draft: false
slug: "what-can-we-learn-from-global-cities"
date: "2015-06-15T05:25:00+00:00"
description: "The 2015 New Cities Summit in Jakarta was a rare opportunity to talk to economists, planners, designers and smart city nerds from around the world"
banner: "/img/blog/Jakarta.jpg"
---

Matt and Kevin&nbsp;attended the 2015 New Cities Summit in Jakarta. This is a biennial conference run by the New Cities Foundation and its&nbsp;all about lifting the game in city design, planning and management. They attended some interesting sessions and talked to people working around the world&nbsp;on innovative, and often low cost, ways of making cities more efficient and liveable. Some of the things taken from the conference were:&nbsp;<br><ul><li>As if&nbsp;you didn't know it by now, its pretty apparent that most of the world's economic dynamism can be found in the rapidly growing cities of the world. Out of sheer necessity and made possible by the mass of human capital, there is burgeoning entrepreneurialism, with people leaping onto opportunities, using new and old tech to meet the needs of residents and businesses in innovative ways</li><li>Australia is lagging the world in thinking about, and implementing all that is good about smart cities. That is, collecting and making available, data about how we use and move about our cities</li><li>Its accurate to say that some of the problems faced by rapidly growing megacities may have already been solved in Australia through larger scale market operations. For example, in Lagos, Nigeria (a city of around 13 million and growing by the same amount each year as the whole of Australia), a smart phone app is being used by a clever start up to effectively replicate the big supermarket supply chain logistics process; coordinating the distribution of fresh fruit and vegetables to small retailers throughout the city. The difference is, they do it for a fraction of the cost and there are thousands of individual retailers, not just a few</li><li>The sheer scale of the challenges some developing world megacities face in water access, mobility, infrastructure shortfalls and housing is daunting. However, what we in Australia can take away from this is, that if cities with much larger challenges, and far fewer resources can make inroads into their problems, then our cities should have the resources to solve our own affordability, congestion and pollution issues</li><li>Evidence-based planning and development faces all the same political hurdles in other cities as it does in Australia. We can devise&nbsp;the best, data-driven solution we like,&nbsp;&nbsp;but if we can't win the political argument, it won't necessarily be the solution that is chosen</li></ul>
